---
title: "On Paul Garner, "
categories:
  - me/cfs
tags:
  - me/cfs
classes: wide
---

On a recent [BBC Radio 5 segment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2UnoiHryx4), Prof. Paul Garner — a Liverpool-based Emeritus Professor of Evidence Synthesis in Public Health, who recovered from a short bout of long covid in 2020 — claimed that long covid is fundamentally the result of the brain's alarm system sensing danger and producing symptoms. This is a claim Prof. Garner has made before, such as in this [BMJ piece from 2021](https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2021/01/25/paul-garner-on-his-recovery-from-long-covid/). Various callers went on to challenge Prof. Garner's claim, citing the known biochemical and physical alterations that occur in long covid, and questioning the role of psychological therapies.

At the risk of stating the obvious, another major reason Prof. Garner's claim should be challenged is that there exists no good evidence to support it, and it thefore falls under the banner of 'medical hypothesis'. The purpose of this blog is to outline what Prof. Garner believes long covid is and isn't, how this fits within the context of the biopsychosocial approach to ME/CFS, and the evidence for such claims.

It has been fascinating to watch an academic noted for his work in evidence synthesis fall down the rabbit hole of in favour of annecodata and case studies about recovery from long covid.

## What does Paul Garner believe long covid is?
Prof Garner's understanding of long covid has been informed greatly by his own personal experience of, and recovery from, the illness. Garner's story is well documented online. In summary, he became ill in mid-March, 2020, after contracting SARS-CoV-2. [A blog from May 5](https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/05/05/paul-garner-people-who-have-a-more-protracted-illness-need-help-to-understand-and-cope-with-the-constantly-shifting-bizarre-symptoms/) details how seven weeks since infection he was still very ill, and that he believed that this was 'not some "post-viral fatigue syndrome"' but rather a prolonged acute infection. In a [follow-up blog from May 19](https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/05/19/paul-garner-covid-19-and-fatigue-a-game-of-snakes-and-ladders/), his tone had dramatically changed: having experienced a worsening of symptoms brought on by strenous exercise, Garner, having made contact with people in the ME/CFS world, is questioning whether this is part of the acute illness or "post-viral".

By September, Garner (seems)[https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/09/04/paul-garner-on-long-haul-covid-19-dont-try-and-dominate-this-virus-accommodate-it/] resigned to having developed "an illness that resembles ME/CSF (SIC)," and seems receptive to advice from those in the ME/CFS community regarding, for example, pacing. We don't hear from Garner again until (January 2021)[https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2021/01/25/paul-garner-on-his-recovery-from-long-covid/], by which time he had recovered. It is in this blog 

I've noticed this is very prevalent in the world of ME/CFS and other infeciton-associated chronic illnesses, where  hypotheses are routinely presented as fact; sometimes patients are as guilty of this as clinicians and researchers.



 