---
title: "What next for NHS ME/CFS Specialist Services? Part 1: Current provision"
categories:
  - health
  - me/cfs
tags:
  - health
  - me/cfs
classes: wide
---

Patients with a suspected diagnosis of ME/CFS are generally referred to their local service by their GP, although referral to a specialist service is not always possible or appropriate; in such cases, patients may fall under the care of hospital consultants, such as rheumatologists, or may remain under the care of their GP.

## Current setup
Basic information about the services can be found on the ME Association website (https://meassociation.org.uk/nhsspecialistservices/), though the transient nature of the services means the page is probably never quite up to date. A 2017 survey by the British Association for CFS/ME (BACME) reported that around 50 services existed at that time; the vast majority were delivered by an NHS organisation, while a small number were NHS-commissioned but delivered by non-NHS organisations. Three services were solely prediatric, and nine services accepted adults and children or varying ages. Extrapolating from the incomplete survery statistics, the report estimated that the services were seeing over 12,500 adults and 1000 children each year.

Coverage is either geographical or by NHS trust. It is clear from the listings that there exists marked variation amongst the services. Many of the specialist services are run by a multidisciplinary team in an outpatient department of a trust hospital. In other locations, the service appears under the banner of a fatigue clinic, or even a persistent physical symptoms service; some of these are community based and can be accessed through self-referral.

## NICE guideline for ME/CFS
On accessing a specialist service, patients may undergo further investigations if a diagnosis is not yet confirmed. Once the diagnosis is confirmed, patients will be offered a management programme and/or theraputic interventions that are largely determined by the make-up and expertise of the team operating the service. The BACME report included statistics on diagnostic rates from the small number of services who could provide such data. A rough aggregation of the statistics reveals that around 50% of patients referred to the services obtain a diagnosis of ME/CFS and are taken on for therapy. Devasahayam, A., Lawn, T., Murphy, M., & White, P. D. (2012). Alternative Diagnoses to Chronic Fatigue Syndrome in Referrals to a Specialist Service: Service Evaluation Survey. JRSM Short Reports, 3(1), 1–5. doi.org/10.1258/shorts.2011.011127

What these services have in common is that the management programme should follow the recommendations made in the NICE clinical guideline for ME/CFS. The [current implementation of the guideline](https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg53) recommends a personalised individual approach to management and the use of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) and/or two differing approaches to activity/energy management known as graded exercise therapy (GET) and pacing.

However, a new revised guideline is due to be published in 2021.

## BACME
The [British Association for CFS/ME (BACME)](https://www.bacme.info/) is a multidisciplinary organisation for UK professionals who are involved in the delivery of clinically effective services for patients with ME/CFS. Membership is open to clinicians and researchers, including psychologists, medical doctors, managers, students, and physiotherapists. Resources, education, and professional development

BACME has always been supportive of the 2007 guideline. Indeed, BACME members were on the guideline expert panel and/or were key figures in key research studies and clinical trials that formed part of the guideline evidence base.

https://www.bacme.info/sites/bacme.info/files/BACME%20Position%20Paper%20on%20the%20Management%20of%20ME-CFS%20October%202020.pdf
"There is evolving evidence to indicate a dysregulation of multiple dynamic physiological systems in explaining the symptom picture seen in ME/CFS. Research has demonstrated changes in Immune System responses, Autonomic Nervous System function, Neuroendocrine pathways including the Hypothalamus-Pituitary-Adrenal axis along with cellular metabolic changes."

## 'Not deconditioning, but dysregulation'

## Long-Covid and expansion of NHS ME/CFS Specialist Services
https://measussex.org.uk/coronavirus-aftermath-may/
Miller paper on long-Covid

https://mecfsskeptic.com/the-nice-guideline-committee-and-grade-methodology/
